=================================
On Not Knowing One's Path in Life
=================================

   | Like a child playing on the beach
   | in front of the grand ocean
   | struck by its vastness:
   | so many are the sands of possibilities.

A friend told me that she felt losing her purpose in life. She is,
despite her decent job and the luxury she can afford because of it,
quite unhappy about her life. It is for me crucial that she mentioned
that word “purpose” for this signifies a deep existential problem. She
felt unconnected to her current job, lost interest in her significant
other, and no matter how many leisure she would pursue, she was never
satisfied. This hole in her heart creates a mud which drowns her, and
she feels like a dead body which functions simply out of reflex. She
felt numb to her life.

She said to me that she does not know what would be her path. I told her
that I also do not know what is mine. At first, she thought that I am
making a joke. After I repeated what I said with the same conviction,
she trusted me. Then, she continued, should we live like this, without a
purpose and a sense of direction? Not to give her a misleading answer, I
paused a moment before saying: yes and no. What follows was an extension
of my discussion with her.

The Will to Meaning
===================

Given that my dear friend mentioned that her life seems to bear no
meaning, my thought arrives on the logotherapy of Viktor Frankl. I have
neither formal training in psychology nor psychiatry, and therefore, my
understanding is of that of a layperson. However, after reading his
well-known work, A Man’s Search for Meaning (Frankl 2004), I find it
describing my friend’s trouble well. Moreover, I see similarities with
the teaching I find in the Javanese philosophy and Buddhism, two ethical
sources with which I am relatively familiar. Therefore, for the sake of
my dear friend, I try to explain these concepts in logotherapy, which I
consider giving us a good start in our discussion. The second part of
the mentioned book explains all of the essential concepts, from which I
take the following explanations.

In Frankl’s logotherapy, a man’s *will for meaning* is the primary
motivational force in life. He contrasted this motivational force with
those of the *will for power*\  [1]_ or the *will for pleasure*\  [2]_.
When this will to meaning is frustrated, this is an “existential
frustration”, which logotherapy view as the source of not only man’s
discontent but also the pathology of their psyche.

As far as I understand it, this *meaning* Frankl talked about is not the
meaning of life with a capital “M”, which I think falls into the realm
of philosophy or religion. He spoke rather about the meaning of life
with a small “m”: the meaning of life which one finds at the moment of
one’s life, right here, right now, connected with the reality of that
person’s life.

According to logotherapy, one will find meaning in three different ways:
(1) by creating or doing meaningful work; (2) by experiencing something
or meeting someone; and (3) by the attitude one takes toward unavoidable
suffering. Frankl himself, as far as I know from his autobiography [3]_,
found his meaning of life in the deep of the concentration camp. After
losing all of his family including his beloved wife, and suffer
unbearable pain both physically and psychologically, he found his
meaning of life, which becomes his internal source to survive the horror
of the concentration camp. As a scientist, he decided to observe the
life inside the concentration camp, and this hope to finally writing it
down and publishing it in the future keeps him alive.

Frankl’s life, as an example, might seem grandeur. However, the first
two ways of finding meaning might be a simple thing. The Japanese word
ikigai describes the pleasures and meanings of life: consisting of the
word “iki” (to live) and “gai” (reason). Ken Mogi explains about this
word in an accessible book (Mogi 2017). Mogi explained that this word
does not always signify something big. It can be as simple as, for
example, to wake up in the morning to see a precious grandchild. In my
opinion, “the reason to wake up in the morning” resonates well with the
spirit of our age, because I have the impression that most of the people
experience life’s fatigue that makes them feel hard to “wake up in the
morning”. For some people, probably they don’t have any reason at all.
Does it make sense to wake up in the morning, repeating all of these
routines, getting shouted at and punched down in the hardness of day to
day life?

That one sees no reason (and therefore, no meaning) in one’s daily
suffering is the sign of the existential frustration about which Frankl
was talking. One heals this frustration by finding the meaning of one’s
life: the meaning of one’s existence at that current moment, at that
current place, with whatever situation that one currently faces. The
question we can ask ourselves is then, “With all the resources available
to me, in the place I currently am, and all the circumstances I am
currently facing, what is it that I may do, to fulfill an existential
meaning, which can only be fulfilled by me alone?”

The Path
========

In the novel *Kitchen* by Banana Yoshimoto (Yoshimoto and Schlecht
2014), the main character finds her *ikigai* in cooking. After the death
of her grandmother, Mikage has no family left. Feeling alone and
depressed, she was surprised by a rather strange offer by one
acquaintance of her late grandmother: to move in with him and his mother
as a flatmate. Yūichi and Eriko Tanabe are no ordinary family. Despite
looked like a beautiful mother, Eriko was, in fact, a man. She managed a
transgender bar at nights and turned to be a sagacious person. Yūichi is
a carefree student who often amuses Mikage in various ways. Mikage
developed her purpose to be a cook, during her memorable stay on the
sofa bed of the family. She comes into the realization that the place
wherein she feels comfortable the most is, after all, the *kitchen*.

   Die Küchen in meinen Träumen.

   Wie viele werden es sein? In meiner Vorstellung und in der
   Wirklichkeit. Auf Reisen, allein, unter vielen Menschen, zu zweit.
   Überall, wo mein Leben sich abspielt. Und ich bin sicher: Es werden
   viele sein. [4]_

The unexpected death of her grandmother, the meeting with the unusual
Tanabe, her feat of cooking for the family, as well as her chosen path
of doing a vocational study in the field: although this path of
*existential meaning* made sense for us — the reader — it does not
necessarily so for Mikage herself. If I imagine myself in Mikage’s life,
things seem to happen rather unexpectedly, with one event leads somehow
to the other. My choice was made in moment to moment, limited only by
the circumstances which arise at that particular point in life. The path
was not visible, although, by some strange *coincidence*, we took our
step down its direction. Life made sense when it is viewed from a birds
view, or in retrospects. However, this requires one has either an
omniscient ability or to arrive at the end of life, and looking back to
finally grasp the ultimate meaning of our life [5]_. Instead of this
*ultimate meaning*, we can look for a smaller moment-to-moment-meaning
to our life.

Mikage tried to make sense out of her life. One of the theme that to me
so apparent was her struggle to find the meaning of her loneliness.

   Warum nur bleibt dem Menschen so wenig Wahl? Auch wenn man geschunden
   wird wie ein Stück Vieh, man kocht sein Essen, isst, schläft. Die
   Menschen, die man liebt, sterben einem weg. Einer nach dem anderen.
   Und dennoch muss man weiterleben. [6]_

To continue to live in the face of meaninglessness of life: this is what
Mikage faced. To her suffering, I can relate, for this is true for
anyone in one point or another in life. To Mikage, it is through
*living* with the Tanabe and *doing* her work as a novice cook that she
began to be able to make sense out of her life. The gesture of Mikage
feeding the person she loves transmit a warm feeling: that a path has
been chosen and being stepped upon. It is precisely because we keep
losing the people we love the most that we should cherish them while we
can. It can be as simple as bringing a *katsudon*\  [7]_ to a hungry
person who occupies our heart.

A path is a curious symbol for it signifies a journey. An interesting
discussion about a path or about a journey took place only when such a
path is already taken, or when such a journey has been walked. Why do I
think that it is so? Because from a path, a journey: we took benefit
from the *experiences* it gives us. Our contemporary life made it
possible to travel somewhere else without leaving the comfort of our
room. Virtual experiences invade our living room, giving an impression,
that it is not necessary anymore that one leaves one’s home for a trip
to a distant land. We can then tell our neighbors about what we *know*
about it. However, this is — we shall remind ourselves — only a virtual
experience. A plastic flower, no matter how beautiful it is, is not an
adequate substitute for the real ones. The real flowers wither quickly,
but its beauty, smell, and touch stay with us eternally in our memory.
The path is to be walked; the journey is to be taken. Only then we can
have an interesting discussion with our neighbors. Is it not that from
such discussion, we are not only looking for *information* and *facts*,
but also all of those subjective experiences and wisdom that come from
undertaking the journey?

The search for one’s path is then not a passive one. One has to make the
first step out of one’s home. If there are a thousand souls in this
world, there will be a thousand paths. To reach it, to know that it is
*mine* and not someone else’s, we have to walk on it. The web of a
thousand paths would lead to one single path: a path which is our own.

Sasmita
=======

Coincidence is what we call an unforeseen event which takes place. Very
often it defies our everyday understanding of phenomena, simply because
its probability of taking place is minimal. However, life is full of
such events. If one expects that a life’s path is straight and easy to
find, one’s experience in the day to day life soon prove that it is not
the case. The path is complicated, and one step leads to the other
sometimes in a nonlinear fashion. There are coincidences, unexpected
meetings, unforeseeable fortunes, and misfortunes. However, all of these
are necessary, for these are the landscapes and sceneries which we
encounter by walking such a path. Our moment to moment decisions is the
step that we take: a conscious effort. Are there then a guide for us in
this vast web of possibilities? So complicated that we feel lost from
time to time?

In the performance of Gamelan music, the musician should be able to hear
the *sasmita*\  [8]_\ *.* What piece is going to be performed? Listen to
the opening which is given by the Bonang [9]_ instrument. Whether we are
changing the tempo of the piece or going to a different level of
rhythmic density? Listen to the Kendhang [10]_. Are we moving to a
particular section of the music? Listen to the Rebab [11]_, the
Gender [12]_, and the Bonang. There are signs for everything and the
able musician act accordingly to the signs. To be ready for the sign, to
perform what is required given the sign, to realize the music in every
musical situation possible: to my opinion, these are true both in the
performance of Karawitan and also in life.

These signs are so subtle that a lay listener would not be able to
recognize it. It requires practice so that one is not only able to
listen to one’s instrument, but also at the same time able to listen to
the other instruments, and the sign they might give us. To do this, we
need to be mindful and concentrated: two things which are — to my
opinion — challenging to be achieved in our distracting modern life.

However, the signs are everywhere, and to a certain degree, we obey the
sign regardless of us being conscious about it. Are we not waking up in
the morning and feeling sleepy at night? Aren’t we live according to a
cycle which is in tune with the nature surrounding us? What is it that
the universe is trying to teach us through its changing cycle of day and
night? Through the changing of seasons through its warmth and cold days?
Our watch is so precise nowadays that we forget how to tell the time of
the day by observing the position of the sun.

Is it the start of a new day? Look for that silver thread on the horizon
in the edge of the darkness which the night has left. That silver thread
is a small ray of hope that a new day will come and the darkest of the
night has come to an end. Is it the middle of the day? Look at the
length and the shape of the shadows of things, whether the sun is on top
of our head, whether its ray is the warmest, given that the sun shines
upon us at all? Also, the dusk with its beautiful pink-colored sky?
Which slowly turns into dark violet before the night closes its dark
curtain upon us once again? Are we observing all of these signs the
universe has been giving us since the beginning of time?

Look at the nighttime sky and observe the moon! See how it changes its
shape from time to time, teaching our ancestors from thousand of
thousand years ago the wisdom that we take for granted in these days and
ages. The position of the stars, the shape of the moon: are they not the
signs which have been used by the great unnamed navigators who explored
our earth in the time long forgotten?

It is said in one verse of the Quran that “there truly are signs in the
creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alternation of night
and day, for those with understanding” (Haleem 2008 Q.S. 3: 190). The
sign is clear for those with *understanding*: those well-trained
musicians in the art of Karawitan. Are we then well-trained enough to be
able to read the sign? Our daily life is like a forest with millions of
trees of information and events. A layperson would lose in such a
forest, but not a ranger with proper training.

One of the ways to practice is then to practice our mindfulness, to
sharpen our perceptive ability. Not only to be mindful to our inner
self, but also our surroundings: people and environments. What kind of
signs which all of these elements of life are trying to give us?

Look not only outside but also inside, for there is a universe inside
each of us. We shall practice our lost ability to listen to our own
heart. The sound of our heart is so subtle and tend to be inaudible if
we dwell too much on the loud and busy daily life. Seek the silence of
the forest, the emptiness of the last third of the night. Look into the
mirror, into our own honest eyes: what is it that it tries to tell us?
Not in a hurried tempo of our mechanical civilization, but the joy of
the slowness of nature. Nature is neither too soon nor too late.
Everything in nature happens in the right time. The path is to be walked
from where we find ourselves and requires not that we travel to a
faraway land. If the path does taking us away, then trust it fully where
it brings us. Life changes from moment to moment, and everything is
transitory. Every answer are relative until we arrive at the end of the
journey.

The late good emperor said, “No man will hinder thee from living
according to the reason of thy own nature: nothing will happen to thee
contrary to the reason of the universal nature.” (Antoninus 1889 Book
VI: 58) Let us then seek the true nature of our own and that of the
universe we live in.

The Hero’s Trial
================

What is it then “our nature”? Perhaps it is best to ask ourselves in
that matter.

To those hands that we have, we might ask:

   | O dearest pair of hands,
   | what kind of labor can I undertake
   | by borrowing your strength?
   | What kind of service can I offer
   | to the goodness of humanity
   | with the precision movement of your fingers?

To those feet that we have, we might ask:

   | O dearest pair of feet,
   | what kind of road can I walk on
   | by borrowing your tenacities?
   | What kind of endeavor can I step into
   | so that I may walk the path of the virtuous
   | with the wise balance of your steps?

There is a reason why we are born the way we are, and this reason is for
us to interpret. Life presents challenges as if it is a game with
increasing difficulties. One is continually being tested upon, and it is
easy to feel lost.

   If a thing is difficult to be accomplished by thyself, do not think
   that it is impossible for man: but if anything is possible for man
   and conformable to his nature, think that this can be attained by
   thyself too. (Antoninus 1889 Book VI: 19)

We are not alone in this kind of a journey, and we are not the first to
take such a road. Has not our ancestor taken such a journey far earlier
than us? Look at our legends and myths, to our proverbs and sayings:
what is it that the spirit of old ages is trying to tell us?

Our myths try to teach us something. Campbell takes one of the function
of a myth as to carry the individual psychologically through stages of
life from birth to death (Campbell 2018, 9). Relating this to the man’s
will to meaning discussed before, it is this assistance during these
different stages of life that would help us to navigate through the
complexity of life. A map helps us to reach our destination, but we
still have to navigate through the landscapes ourselves. However, we are
not alone and should not be alone. If there is something to be grateful
for that we live in this era, is that these knowledge are accessible to
us in a finger click. They are there, waiting to be found, like an old
friend we have not been in contact for some time. Go and contact them,
and tell them our concern, and they shall comfort us with their stories.

In every myth, every great literature and works of art, we recognize
ourselves in the position of the heroes. Their trials are our trials;
their wounds are our wounds. It is easy to sympathize with them, for we
are living exactly the symbols which they represent. We have to be able
to read these symbols.

In the story of *Dewaruci*\  [13]_, the warrior Bima lost his sense of
purpose after realizing that his journey was for nothing. He embarked on
a long and dangerous journey out of the belief that there is magical
water that purifies oneself, bestowing ultimate knowledge. This type of
elixir would help him when the great war of the Bharata [14]_ comes, he
thought. However, after all of those deadly fights against severe
storms, giants, and mighty dragon? He only found himself floating on the
vast sea, wounded, tired, while the magical water was still nowhere to
be found.

Are not we all Bima at one point in life? To feel lost and floating on a
vast ocean. What we would like to attain in life is still nowhere to be
found. What we have instead are battle scars, unhealed wounds, and
disappointment after disappointment. It is, however, precisely in this
lowest point, after surviving the “trial of the hero” — as Joseph
Campbell would call it — that the god Dewaruci would reveal himself.
What is it, however, the price at the end of such a journey when we
finally reached it?

There was no magical water, but something better arises: the all-knowing
teacher. The god Dewaruci revealed himself as a miniature deity. He
invited Bima the warrior to enter his ear. The warrior, who has a big
body, laughed and told the tiny god that this is impossible, given the
significant difference in their size [15]_. However, the invitation of
the god turned into a challenge. “Can you then, leap into this ear,
despite the impossibility of its appearance? Would you even dare to do
it?”

A pride warrior as himself, Bima leaped into the ear of the god
Dewaruci. What did he found inside the ear? To his astonishment: a
universe! A universe which is so big that even the great warrior Bima
felt small and meaningless. In the middle of this feeling, Bima submits
his defeat to Dewaruci with the whole of his heart. Dewaruci then
rewarded Bima with something better than an ultimate elixir, or even a
destructive weapon: he obtained the knowledge on the nature of life. It
is with this wisdom that the hero survived the danger that life bestows
upon him, and made him able to regain his motivation to fulfill his
duty. In Campbell’s terminology, this is the apotheosis: the realization
of the hero on his or her full scope of self (Campbell 2018, 118)

Is it then ended in a “live happily ever after”? The real power of such
a myth is that the hero does not stop there. The knowledge is obtained,
but is it then over? The hero then, in the archetype studied by
Campbell, must return to the *normal life* (Campbell 2018, 113). Bima’s
reality, his “normal life”, is as a son from the family of Pandawa of
the warrior caste, who had to endure the tension of a throne dispute,
whose fate is to go into the great war of the Bharata, to rule a
kingdom, and watches over its people. No matter how big the feat of
attaining the true wisdom from Dewaruci, it renders to nothing shall it
is not useful in his day to day reality.

Nowadays, we know so much information than our predecessor but are
unable to obtain any wisdom out of it. We move so fast from one point to
the other, but never really arrive at our destination. Such paradoxical
life we have! A peaceful heart is the one without contradiction. No
wonder we find it hard to be in harmony with ourselves. Should we keep
fighting our way brutally, while dragging our dying body through the
battlefield without a hope of winning it?

Sumarah
=======

A fellow musician once asked me, what would be the best way to translate
the Javanese word *Sumarah*. The occasion was during a performance of a
Gamelan piece, which has that word in the title. In the concert program
we had, it was written that Sumarah “[wird] im musikalischen
Zusammenhang […] etwa gedeutet als: ’Wir haben unser Bestes gegeben,
aber es liegt nicht in unseren Händen, wie es angekommen ist […]’” [16]_

My personal preference for the translation of that word is “submission”,
although it is a special kind of submissiveness. The explanation of my
friend in our concert program describes this well. One does those things
which are within one’s power, to the best of one’s ability, and to
accept what would the universe brings to oneself. What will come is
beyond one’s control, is beyond one’s ability to predict. The act is
done. In such a situation, a person submits to the will of the universe,
knowing fully, that the universe — or any higher existence in one’s
believe — is at work. In the case of our music performance, it might be
an excellent performance, or it might be a bad one. Even after
well-prepared rehearsals, there are always things which are beyond
prediction.

Practicing sumarah means to practice submission to this higher
existence. In Buddhism, one often tries to be mindful of their
*karma*\  [17]_ and all the consequences it may bring. I am
unfortunately but a lay follower of the teaching and not a monk.
However, we will use this only as a usefull model in our discussion to
analyze the problem. For if life is viewed like this, life’s complexity
seems to be reduced: that one’s *karma* defines the result one might
receive. To be able to reach that consciousness, so we say to ourselves,
that I am the owner of my actions, heir to my actions, born of my
actions, related through my actions, and have my actions as my
arbitrator. Whatever I do, for good or for evil, to that will I fall
heir […]” (Thanissaro 2013b)

To do the best in every situation seems like the most trivial things to
do. We find every good advice would tell us the same. However, being
mindful to our action with the contemplation of *karmic relationship,*
to my experience and opinion\ *,* brings a different view to our
action\ *.* A *karmic relationship* is a complex relationship, and its
causalities do not show itself directly to oneself. Contemplating too
much on it may drive one to the madness according to one sutra
(Thanissaro 2013a). However, we may start with those elements in the
model which are easier to grasp and closer to our daily life: that good
action leads to good consequences (Thera 1994), and there are
consequences which are realized in either at the current moment or later
in *this*\  [18]_ life (Thanissaro 1997).

The *Kukkuravatika Sutta* explains that there exists karma with a mixed
intention, which results with mixed consequences: both the good and the
bad. Taking our story of concert preparation — to my understanding — by
the law of karmic causalities, a good concert preparation results in a
good performance. However, this is not the only causalities which are
taken into account. The bad words we used during a frustration moment in
the preparation might hurt a colleague, and in return, affect the
colleague’s performance. We probably were too much focused on the
performance, and neglected our other responsibility so that it came
hunting us in the crucial moment of performance. Alternatively, even
more unrelated: in the past we did something bad, and that “bad thing”
came back in the form of a very critical and unsupportive audience, who
kept making noises during the performance, disturbing our performance.
The consequences of our karma are beyond our control. Only the action is
within our control, and we can only submit ourselves to the results; to
accept it as *it* *is*.

One might then find this idea similar to those which the Stoics taught
us. That there are things which are within our power, and there are
things which are not (Epictetus 1890 Encheridion, Ch. 1). To those
things which are within our power, let us do our best to ensure that we
used all of our ability. To those things which are not within our power?
Let us return them to the universe in gratefulness and thankfulness. As
Epictetus said it:

   We must make the best use that we can of the things which are in our
   power, and use the rest according to their nature. What is their
   nature then? As God may please. (Epictetus 1890 Discourses, Book 1)

As God (or the universe) may please: this is the way of *sumarah*. It is
not to give up living, but rather, acceptance of living after one’s
struggle. An undisturbed sleep at night is obtained only after the day
is filled with meaningful labor. I believe we all have experienced such
sleep on one occasion or more.

The Step
========

If we do not know the path, which is our life’s path, then everything is
in the right place. Because this realization is the first sign that the
path has shown itself before us. There exist modern day slogan which
sounds wise, but to me personally might present a misunderstanding. We
hear nowadays words such as “you only life once” [19]_, or “seize the
day” [20]_. Even more: the call to find one’s passion, or to *find*
oneself. These are, of course, contain truths in itself, and they echo
exactly the eternal wisdom which comes without regards to cultural or
regional differences. However, this unleashes an even more restless
generation, who thinks that the “real life” is “out there”. It is a call
for consumerism, to continually lose the sense of limit, and to always
against something for the sake of “against something”. This kind of
restlessness is, to me, contrary to the path of life we are seeking.
What we want is a meaningful life.

Our discussion starts with the realization that we are unable to
determine our life’s path. In my opinion, this is beyond our control. I
am at the moment as clueless as you are. For the question, as followed
by this writing, is a hard one. It is not only a matter of choosing
one’s vocation, or whether one follows “one’s passion” or not. It is
about our relationship with our existence, both with ourselves and with
the universe, as well as its meaning. Such a question requires a
lifetime to answer.

Where does the path start? It is here, right here and right now. We do
not have to look outside or far away. The path shows itself when we have
a clear mind and heart. Like a pond which shows the bottom clearly when
the surface is calm, and so also our ability to see the path is at its
best when we regain our inner composure.

Look clearly at our surroundings! What is it that the universe is trying
to teach us, by making us meet those people we meet in our life? Why
them and not the other? What virtue can I learn from them, what vice can
I recognize from them? What is it that the universe is trying to teach
us, by making such events in our life took place? What kind of person
have we have become by deriving interpretation of all of those events in
our life? Moreover, the vocation we practice, the work that we have
done, what are the meanings of all of them? Are they meaningless like
how we condemn them to be, or it is merely part of a hero’s trial that
we have yet to understand?

Another friend told me, faced with the busyness of his daily life, what
he can do is to pierce through all of the work and problem. “It is a
luxury even to have the time to fret upon this or that,” he said.
Knowing him for years and how a *serious* person that he is, this thing
he said is neither a sign of ignorance nor recklessness. Instead, it is
a spritual practice whose name unknown to him: the *karma yoga*\  [21]_.
The god Krishna supposedly taugh it to the warrior Arjuna of the Pandawa
family during the beginning of the great Bharata war [22]_. The teaching
can be summarized as: know your duty, do it, and expect nothing but this
deed of doing good work. Of course, this does not mean that one should
let go of the need of making a living. It is instead, a call to
transform our daily business into a spiritual practice, which does not
separate the spiritual aspect from its materialistic reality. Those long
hours at the office is a heroic feat, tending to the kids are holy, and
patiently listening to the spouse after such a long day is a sacred
duty: what a mythical way to live!

Like Arjuna in the field of Kuru, ready to face the great Bharata war,
we shall be patient and do our duty with gratefulness: to learn our
nature, to understand the signs of the universe, and to perfect our
craft or vocation to the utmost perfection. For to live is a gift, and
this gift of life is short. Death is always lurking nearby, nearer than
even the most beloved lover.

   | A human’s life
   | lasts only a breath long.
   | The rain falls from heaven above
   | to the great ocean I shall return.

I wish that we find the true path in our life, and to be granted the
bravery and patience it requires to endure its trials.

.. raw:: latex

   \bigskip{}

*Pichelsberg, June 8th, 2019*

.. raw:: latex

   \bigskip{}


Notes
=====

.. [1]
   This he attributes to Adlerian psychology, in which the motivation of
   a man is to obtain *power*, such as position, money, etc.

.. [2]
   This he attributes to Freudian psychology, in which the motivation of
   a man is related to man’s will to satisfy *pleasure*, often the very
   based one, i.e., sex, food, etc.

.. [3]
   The first part of the mentioned book.

.. [4]
   “The kitchen in my dreams. How many would they be? In my imagination
   and reality. During travels, while I am alone, in the middle of many
   people, together with someone. Everywhere where my life takes place.
   And I am sure: there will be many of them.” (Yoshimoto and Schlecht
   2014, 68)

.. [5]
   Frankl explains a similar idea in his book using a movie as a
   metaphor. The movie, made out of various scenes and clips, would only
   make sense to the audience when they view it to the end as a whole.
   The ultimate meaning of life is possible only when one reaches the
   end of life, as to how one understands a movie after watching it
   until the end.

.. [6]
   “Why human is left with so little choices? Even when one is enslaved
   to labor like a cattle, one cook one’s meal, eats, sleeps. The person
   that one loves would pass away. One after another. And even so, one
   must continue to live.” (Yoshimoto and Schlecht 2014, 129)

.. [7]
   A Japanese rice bowl dish.

.. [8]
   English: sign.

.. [9]
   An instrument consists of 14 small horizontal gongs, which are laid
   on top of sails hanged on a wooden frame.

.. [10]
   Javanese membrane drums with the function of “leading all musical
   matters related to the rhythm” (Javanese: *pamurba irama*).

.. [11]
   A Javanese two strings bowed instrument with the function of “leading
   all musical matters related to the melody” (Javanese: *pamurba
   lagu*).

.. [12]
   Two-handed metallophones with resonant tubes. As part of the melodic
   elaborating instruments, it realizes the skeletal melody of the piece
   with melodic phrases (*cengkok*).

.. [13]
   I tell this story here based on my memory, as I remember it from
   various sources, i.e., Wayang performances, discussion with my
   father, or books which I cannot recall and retrieve for they are left
   in my private library in Bandung, Indonesia. It may contain
   differences with other sources. This version might be close to the
   one which is told by the late poet of the Surakarta palace, the late
   Raden Ngabehi Yasadipura.

.. [14]
   Javanese: *Bharatayudha*. The story is famous under its original
   title *Mahabharata*. For an enjoyable read of the *Bharatayudha* epic
   in general, in a summarized prose form which contains this episode of
   meeting Dewaruci, I can recommend the one by Nyoman S. Pendit (Pendit
   2003). Unfortunately, I do not have any specific recommendation for
   the English and German translations at the moment for two reasons.
   First, I have not the opportunity to read any. Second, most
   translations use the “original” *Mahabharata*, i.e., the Indian one,
   and not the “adapted” version, i.e., the Javanese or the Balinese
   one.

.. [15]
   The wayang form of both characters shows the difference clearly in
   juxtaposition.

.. [16]
   Sumarah is] in the musical context […] somewhat translated as: ’We
   have given our best, but it does not lie in our hands, how [the
   music] will turn out.’” From the concert program *ÜberLeben*, Gamelan
   Ensemble *Arum Sih* und Freunde, Übersee Museum Bremen, May 25th,
   2019.

.. [17]
   The word means *action*, and it includes both physical action as well
   as the mental or spiritual ones.

.. [18]
   The Buddhist believes in reincarnation and a life after the current
   one. Therefore, there are consequences of the karma, which is
   realized in *later* life and not *this* one.

.. [19]
   To make sure my understanding of the “language of the youth today” is
   right, I have checked this in an Urban Dictionary (Fyre150 2012),
   that it is this phrase that the acronym yolo would refer to. Looking
   at their entry, I feel I have a lot to learn.

.. [20]
   A known translation from a part of Horace’s Ode *carpe diem*. The
   sentence reads: *dum loquimur, fugerit invida aetas: carpe diem quam
   minimum credula postero* (In the moment of our talking, envious time
   has ebb’d away. Seize the present; trust tomorrow e’en as little as
   you may) (Horace 1882 Book 1, Poem 11). The translation comes from
   the cited book.

.. [21]
   My interpretation of the word: “a path to enlightment through one’s
   work”. From the word *karma,* here I interpret as work, and *yoga,*
   which can mean meditation (von Glasenapp 2008, 16), in the sense of
   “spritual practice”.

.. [22]
   The story and the exposition of the teaching are beautifully written
   in the epic poem *Bhagavadgita,* an episode of the *Mahabharata*, for
   example in German translation by Boxberger (von Glasenapp 2008).



References
==========

.. raw:: latex

   \bibliographystyle{plain}

.. raw:: html

   <div id="refs" class="references">

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-antoninus_thoughts_1889">

Antoninus, Marcus Arelius. 1889. *The Thoughts of the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus*. Translated by Goerge Long. Boston: Little, Brown,
and Company.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-campbell_pathways_2018">

Campbell, Joseph. 2018. *Pathways to Bliss: Mythology and Personal
Transformation*. Edited by David Kudler. Yogi Impressions.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-epictetus_discourses_1890">

Epictetus. 1890. *The Discourses of Epictetus, with the Encheridion and
Fragments*. Translated by Goerge Long. London: George Bell and Sons.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-frankl_mans_2004">

Frankl, Viktor Emil. 2004. *Man’s search for meaning: the classic
tribute to hope from the Holocaust*. London: Rider.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-fyre150_urban_2012">

Fyre150. 2012. “Urban Dictionary: YOLO.” *Urban Dictionary*.
https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=YOLO.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-haleem_qur_2008">

Haleem, M. A. S. Abdel, trans. 2008. *The Qur’an*. Oxford: OUP Oxford.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-horace_odes_1882">

Horace. 1882. *The Odes and Camen Saeculare of Horace*. Translated by
John Conington. London: George Bell and Sons.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-mogi_little_2017">

Mogi, Ken. 2017. *The Little Book of Ikigai: The Secret Japanese Way to
Live a Happy and Long Life*. London: Hachette UK.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-pendit_mahabharata_2003">

Pendit, Nyoman S. 2003. *Mahabharata*. Jakarta: Gramedia Pustaka Utama.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-thanissaro_nibbedhika_1997">

Thanissaro, Bhikkhu, trans. 1997. “Nibbedhika Sutta: Penetrative (AN
6.63).” *Access to Insight*.
https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/an/an06/an06.063.than.html#part-5.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-thanissaro_acintita_2013">

———, trans. 2013a. “Acintita Sutta: Unconjecturable (AN 4.77).” *Access
to Insight*.
https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/an/an04/an04.077.than.html.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-thanissaro_upajjhatthana_2013">

———, trans. 2013b. “Upajjhatthana Sutta: Subjects for Contemplation (AN
5.57).” *Access to Insight*.
https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/an/an05/an05.057.than.html.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-thera_kukkuravatika_1994">

Thera, Nanamoli, trans. 1994. “Kukkuravatika Sutta: The Dog-Duty Ascetic
(MN 57).” *Access to Insight*.
https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/mn/mn.057.nymo.html.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-von_glasenapp_bhagavadgita_2008">

von Glasenapp, Helmuth, ed. 2008. *Bhagavadgita: das Lied der Gottheit*.
Translated by Robert Boxberger. Reclams Universal-Bibliothek 7874.
Stuttgart: Reclam.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-yoshimoto_kitchen_2014">

Yoshimoto, Banana, and Wolfgang Schlecht. 2014. *Kitchen*. Diogenes
Taschenbuch Deluxe. Zürich: Diogenes.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

