============================
Ones Who Complete Themselves
============================

On one occasion, the author has the opportunity to visit the city Weimar
where Goethe the poet lived. Probably in one of his visits to many
places, the author read a sentence that intrigued him. It said that
Goethe was “a poet who completed himself.” [1]_

The process of self-completion, the author believes, is a process in
which artists, scientists, crafts-persons, martial artist, and spiritual
practitioners, among others, are accustomed to. Goethe was a statesman,
a scientist, and a poet. He must have been *completing* himself both
in his craft as well as a person.

Intuitively, we might experience this longing for self-completion.
However, wherefore is this longing? There many answers to that question.
However, the author thinks that one of the motivations for
self-completion is so humans may face the sorrow and hardships in life.

The quest for perfection in virtue is a self-fulfilling journey. It is
virtuous in itself. The professions mentioned before require that one
trains oneself to obtain skills and practical knowledge. One may obtain
these by preparatory study, but the most fruitful way to achieve it is
through often practical experience. Even in the context of a spiritual
search, some spiritual traditions used the
term *training* and *practice* as its path to enlightenment.

Let us follow the trail of this muse, and see how we can connect the
search for self-completion, as a whole, to art, especially in the realm
of poetry. Let us start from the beginning, from our intuitive longing
for self-completion.


The Longing for Self Completion
===============================

Suffering is a noble truth, said Buddha, and, therefore,
unavoidable. [2]_ To live as a human is to experience sorrow in various
forms. If it is unavoidable, then it is the best thing to do that trains
and prepares for the worst.

However, by training oneself, human makes their progress: it survives
the hardships and grows. Like a farmer who prepares for winter, those
with the best tool and knowledge would be able to prepare better.
Self-completion is the human effort to prepare their tool in facing
life’s suffering. A completed craftsman is skillful in completing the
challenge of the task that comes. When one is ready, one answers in the
best way.

Our contemporary world demands speed and practical solutions. However,
even in a hasting world, small spaces exist in which an honest person
may practice and perfect the self. In this small space, the person acts
like someone who is sharpening a knife with a grindstone. The person
takes time to make the knife sharp, patiently endure the resistance of
the grinding stone. Because of this, the knife will serve its function
better: it cuts through materials less hindered. It is with such a hope
we undertake our effort in self-completion.

Very often, the effort to self-completion requires solitude. Because in
our pursuit of self-completion, we will be busy with our self. A person
who undertakes the path of self-completion will be in an ongoing battle
with the weakness of the self, whatever that weakness may be. This
battle consumes time. In the process, one can be so busy with the self
that one stops to identify oneself with another person. It is always a
hard battle.


Art as One of the Many Path
===========================

Art may serve as a path to self-completion. It serves this function in
two ways, depending on the actor who makes uses of it. From the side of
the artist, art serves self-completion by which the artist practices and
creates the art. From the side of the appreciator, art is a means to
self-reflection and catharsis.

One may ask whether art should serve any function at all. The author
deliberately chooses a position in this matter. So that art can be used
as a path to self-completion, art must serve a function. Both the artist
and the appreciator would develop a particular acuity to the matter,
along with their progress. The artists will curate the work that they
create; the appreciator will select the work that they appreciate.

Regarding the *function* of art, different cultures might place
different values on it. The author will use an example he is most
familiar with: the Javanese culture.

The Knowledge on Refine Things
==============================

In the context of Javanese art, art is a means to refine a person,
making it humane. It is shown, for example, by the term \ *karawitan*.
The word as a whole may refer to the Javanese musical art in
general [3]_ or the skill to cultivate and to perform a Gamelan
piece. [4]_ Palgunadi explained that the word \ *karawitan* comes from
the root word \ *rawit* that has the
meaning \ *small* or *refine*. [5]_ The process of realizing a musical
piece is a process of combining small and refine musical elements to
create a complex whole. In the whole process, a sensitivity to an
ultimate sense of beauty, \ *rasa*, is essential. [6]_

Art has, therefore, an educational function, and it contributes to the
development of a person. However, the way of \ *educating* is subtle in
comparison to an actual pedagogic method. Moreover, the subject of the
education is also a subtle one: the ultimate knowledge. [7]_ By training
one’s sensitivity to the ultimate beauty, the \ *rasa*, one will also be
sensitive to a higher spiritual existence, the \ *rasajati*.

In the complex of the Javanese worldview, this sensitivity to
the \ *higher truth* also has a consequence in social life. An ideal
society is a society in which the individual posses a particular
sensitivity to their surroundings, both nature, and human. As such, the
individual will contribute to harmony in social interaction.

Being an artist in such a world means that the artist must be able to
hear an inner voice: an echo of a higher power. By perfecting the
artistic skill, the artist is also perfecting the sensitivity to this
higher power. If the artist is sensitive enough, the inner voice will be
clear, and the artist will be able to hear the truth that the inner
voice speaks. The work would reflect what is spoken by the voice.

The audience is not free from such an experience. Since the higher truth
may speak through the art, the audience must also be sensitive so that
they understand its saying. Hence, the interaction between the inner
voice, the artist, the art, and the audience gives way to an ethical
society. We would obtain an ethical society by training
a \ *sensitive* society.

In the development of artistic skills, traditionally, professionalism is
not the primary concern. All artists, be it amateur or professional,
pursue the same goal: the perfection of the art. The perfection of the
art gives way to the completion of the self. The completion of the self
creates the sensitivity which is needed to hear the will of the higher
power.

In the art of karawitan, the skill of a musician is considered an honest
measure of one’s progress: whether one can realize the given piece of
music or not. [8]_ Analogously, the measure of someone’s character in
terms of the ethical life is whether one can answer the challenges in
life or not. Everyone may cultivate the musical piece according to their
current level of artistic ability and knowledge. In answering life’s
challenge in the most ethical way, it is of no difference.

Social Responsibility of an Artist
==================================

The artist contributes to the education of society. They carry a social
responsibility. One clear example of such responsibility in Javanese art
is the role of a Dhalang (puppet master). A puppet master serves a
function of a shaman: he or she tells not only stories, but also
philosophical discourse, ethical guidance, gives a blessing, and
performs cleansing rituals to the society. [9]_

In the story recited during a \ *ruwat* performance, a performance which
serves as a cleansing ritual, there will be a character called Dhalang
Kandha Buwana, who will perform the cleansing ritual. [10]_ People
believe that this character is a personification of the god Wisnu. Wisnu
is a god whose duty is to nurture all creation, keeping the balance of
the universe. The symbol shows the significance of art and the artist as
a patron of cosmological order.

By taking a position that art serves purposes, we face fewer problems
regarding the meaning of art’s existence.
Serving \ *those* purposes *is* the meaning of its existence. There is
no doubt why a work of art should exist. The questions are instead: what
purpose that art serves, and how well it serves this purpose.

Existential problems, however, are suffered by many modern artists, said
Camus. He argued that modern artists often doubt the meaning of their
work’s existence, mainly due to the environment in which art finds
itself: in the middle of the professionalism of art. [11]_ He contrasted
this doubt with those of artists in \ *older times*. These artists of
the past, he said, worried more about their skills in the process of
creation. Questioning the meaning of the work’s existence leads to the
inability to create freely, and the artists would suffer from having a
lest trust in itself. [12]_

Camus continued in his essay that art separates itself from the reality
of life by following two extremes. [13]_ The first extreme is to make
art such that it conforms to the majority of the mass, making it a
meaningless recreation. The second extreme is to pursue the fantasy of
the artist solely, making it a negation of reality.

One example of the first extreme is the harsh competition in the world
of entertainment nowadays. We have no lack of \ *entertaining art*, but
then we feel the hole of substance in what they offer.

One example of the second extreme is the often seemingly
“meaninglessness” of contemporary art when it presents itself outside of
the gallery or concert hall. That is: outside of its connoisseur, to a
space of the common people. It is difficult to speak of "meaning" in
such a situation. To the common people, some of the artworks simply do
not make “sense”. Art is either exclusive, incomprehensible, or of no
use for these people. “Art for art’s sake […] is indeed the artificial
art of a factitious and self-absorbed society,” said Camus. [14]_ Art
becomes disconnected from the life of common people.

What the middle way looks like? We may find nowadays that the border
between entertainment and art is a blur. Good art can be “entertaining”.
One example is the Wayang performance. A person who watches a Wayang
performance may enjoy its philosophical contents, as well as its
entertaining elements. Whoever experienced a live Wayang performance
would remember the virtuoso display of puppet playing during battle
scenes, the comedy, the entertaining music, dance performance, as well
as the social gatherings which take place there. At the same time, a
Wayang performance comes from a tradition of shamanic ritual.

In general, a Wayang performance \ *serves a function* and, therefore,
must carry \ *values*. Because of these, the Wayang performance survives
among the common people as an art form. It has a balance between its
intrinsic values and its entertaining element. Camus offers an
intriguing insight in regards to this. He said, in order for art to be
able to speak to everyone, it must speak about things that everyone
knows, and it must speak about the reality that we all share. [15]_ Are
not we all share the triumph and the tragedy of a human’s life?

The Case of the Wayang
======================

The often-used story in a Wayang performance comes from the Mahabharata
epic, especially the Javanese version. [16]_ This story is the most
popular among any epic used in a Wayang performance. Why is this story
so popular? It is because it speaks to and about \ *us*. 

Magnis-Suseno explained that a Wayang performance is so close to the
people because it displays models for problems in human existence on one
side, and refrain from giving a final answer to these problems on the
other side. [17]_ Alternatively, as a paraphrase to Camus', Wayang
speaks to the people about things which everyone knows: the complexity
of human existence. The stories in Bharatayuda are stories of humanity's
struggle in the face of their suffering, as well as their struggle to
attain self-completion. The character in the stories was always facing
the dilemma of making a decision. In order to make a decision, the
character has to be clear about their responsibility and divine task.

Moreover, it must correspond to their current reality. Analogous to what
the character faces, the human must discover for themselves what their
duty is. [18]_\ `  <#sdfootnote19sym>`__\ One of the central motifs in a
wayang story is the problem of choice. In Bharatayudha, two families who
share a common ancestor have to face each other in a war. Like every
war, one has to choose a side. If the opponent is an evil stranger, the
problem might be less problematic. However, knowing that the people on
the other side are either relatives or friends, no matter which side we
choose, we face a difficult choice.

Arjuna and the Problem of Choice
================================

A famous episode from Bharatayuda is the story of Arjuna, who refused to
take on his weapon on the last seconds leading to the war. Falling
helplessly, his charioteer Prabu Kresna revealed not only consoling
words but also the highest form of knowledge in spirituality.

The conversation between Prabu Kresna and Arjuna constitutes an episode
within Bharatayuda under the name Bhagavad Gita. [19]_ In order to
console Arjuna and to motivate him to carry his duty, Kresna revealed to
Arjuna the teaching of the \ *Karma Yoga*. [20]_ In this teaching, one’s
action can be a path to enlightenment. However, it cannot just be an
arbitrary action. It must be a selfless and pure action. This kind of
action leads to enlightenment. [21]_

What is then a selfless and pure action? A pure action that Kresna means
is an action that one does without expecting the fruits of the
action. [22]_ This practice is meaningful so that one realizes that the
“actor” of that action is not the “self”, but rather something of a
higher and “divine” nature. [23]_

To achieve this type of action, one has to train. The path of training
is by doing one’s duty [24]_ and be responsible for it. [25]_ With this,
Kresna tried to motivate Arjuna to take his weapon and fulfill his duty
as a warrior. He must bear the pain of killing his relatives and friends
who stood on the other side.

In the story of Arjuna, he finally chose to go to war because he was
convinced and consoled by the teaching of Kresna: to perform his duty as
a warrior. However, in the epic of Ramayana, two giants from the side of
Rahwana (the epic's antagonist character) chose two different paths in
regards to “performing one’s duty”. [26]_ Kumbakarna the giant chose to
switch side into prince Rama’s army (the epic’s protagonist) because he
thought a warrior has to side with the righteous one, i.e., prince Rama.
However, Kumbakarna, the giant chose to stay due to reason similar to
Arjuna: a warrior’s duty is to fight for the land he serves. Here we see
two different choices in interpreting “one’s duty.” Traditionally,
people consider that both giants are making the \ *right choice*, each
to his own.

Like a playful joke, Kierkegaard presented us what he called the essence
of practical philosophy: the problem of either/or. [27]_ He illustrates
how a person who marries a girl will regret it, but he will also regret
it if he does not marry her. So, either he marries the girl or not, he
will regret it. One may argue that this \ *joke* is to say that our
choice does not matter in the end. However, is \ *the end* the only
consideration in the complexity of making a choice?

One can solve the problem of choice by choosing. So this riddle, to say
that we take the joke more seriously, can be solved by
choosing \ *either* of the choices. Even when both of the choices lead
to regret, it will be two different experiences: one is married to a
woman, or one is not. Marrying someone might mean more responsibilities
in life and putting some constraint into one’s ego. Nevertheless, it
also promises the possibility of a different kind of experience that one
yet to know. Because one does not know it yet, it might be a \ *pleasant
surprise*.

Life is more complicated than the binary opposition that the riddle
poses. Very often, we have more than just two choices. Even when it
does, choosing one answer does not necessarily make the one or the other
choice \ *wrong*. The situation is well exemplified by the story of
Kumbakarna and Wibisana, whereas the two warrior starts with a similar
view on duty, but ends up taking the two different sides. It is
challenging to judge which one is \ *right* and which one is \ *wrong*.
Also, if the riddle starts as a joke, then why not consider the
possibility that one can be \ *either* married and happy \ *or* one is
not married and—still—happy!

Then, concerning Camus’ appeal and the teaching exposed by Kresna, what
is it then the duty of the artist? Specifically, related to the above
discussion before: what is the duty of the artist to the society?

Hints of Duty to the Society
============================

Following the method of the Wayang stories, let us observes some models
of some poet’s life and works. Instead of finding “the final answer”,
they shall give us hints regarding the type of duty an artist has to the
society.

Wiji Thukul’s [28]_ life and work embody a sense of duty. An artist
should have social solidarity, he said. [29]_ In a country like
Indonesia, social responsibility is of importance due to the big divide
between socioeconomic classes. In a situation where government programs
often felt to be ineffective, people have to take care of themselves.
The artists are \ *among* the people. Hence, to Thukul, an artist has a
responsibility to the people.

Literature, he further said, has political power. [30]_ This
consciousness of such a power shows that an artist can contribute to the
life of society. Even though an artist does not affect political
decisions directly, the latent political power of their work may move
the people. In the case of Indonesian history, Thukul explained that
since the Dutch colonial era, to the Japan occupation, and the new order
government of Indonesia, there will always be an \ *underground
literature*, [31]_ which moved outside the official area and rose to
challenge the dominating power. [32]_

To Thukul, art must live where the artist lives. It is through the daily
life of an artist that art takes its form. There is no division between
art and life: the life of the artist is the work. Hence, a poet must
possess a free and active soul so that one seeks truth through freedom,
actively questioning the \ *truth*, and finds oneself always in the
middle of a learning process. [33]_ During the creation of a poem, the
poet relies only on their self. The process requires a particular
sensitivity. Because they must be self-reliant, the artist must fight
for their aspirations. [34]_ The art, according to him, is a medium to
convey the problem of the underprivileged. However, Thukul seems to see
himself in that matter as an anti-hero:

To straight things up, I do not defend the people. In actuality, I am
only defending myself. […] It just happens that by defending myself, I
speak the rights of others who, at the time being, find no place. [35]_

[...]

I am not a protesting poet. I am aware of a process [in life]. The
problems in the poem revert to my personal problems. […] After I drop
out of school, at that moment, I realized the true meaning of
life. [36]_

Despite this clarity of duty, Thukul still faces an inner struggle: the
struggle between his sense of duty as a poet and the corresponding
existential crisis. \ *The Poet*\ `  <#sdfootnote38sym>`__\ is a
declaration of his identity and sense of duty: to write.

   | If no typewriter is available
   | With my hand, I shall write
   | If no black ink is available
   | With charcoals, I shall write
   | If no paper is available
   | On the wall, I shall write
   | If from writing I am forbid
   | With drops of blood
   | I shall write! [37]_

On the other side, in \ *What is Worthy of My Poems*, his existential
struggle is apparent:

   | What is worthy of my poems?
   | […]
   | If we ought to eat
   | but there is nothing there to eat
   | […]
   | What I wrote took months
   | What can I give amid the poverty
   | that strangles us?
   | […]
   | If the audience of poetry reading gave an applause
   | What have I in reality contributed? [38]_

Thukul’s reality is poverty, social injustice, and political oppression.
His artistic output is inseparable from this reality. Therefore,
acknowledging his \ *duty*, the poet had chosen to fulfill his duty as a
householder by other means than art while using poetry to speaks for the
underprivileged. [39]_ Wiji Thukul is never to be found until today,
carrying the duty that he chose. In the middle of all kinds of
oppression, he decided that “there is only one word: resist!” [40]_

The poet Rendra expressed a similar sense of duty. [41]_ His poetry
often criticizes the Indonesian New Order government. When asked why he
was so brave to direct such critics to the government, he said that he
was critical to them not because of his bravery, but rather “out of fear
for what will befall my descendants in the future.” [42]_ In one phase
of his creativity, he even labeled his poetry as “emergency
pamphlets,”  [43]_ to show his utmost concern to the social problem in
Indonesia.

If Thukul’s poetry is a call to arm and the voice of the suppressed,
Rendra’s are the general’s order and the prophet’s divination:

   | Stop looking for the Just King! [44]_
   | The Just King is non-existent.
   | The Just King is a mere diversion!
   | What we should uphold together
   | is the Just Law
   | The Just Law is the guiding star within the storm. [45]_

Rendra, putting himself in the middle of the \ *storm*, answered his
existential struggle. Humans, the universe, and the human’s act are
inseparable elements in which connection is essential to be understood.

   | There exists, indeed, human sovereignty, little Na.
   | But long before that
   | exists the universe sovereignty.
   | […]
   | Without realizing this
   | what is the meaning of culture?
   | What is then the meaning of a poem?
   | The life and all of the human’s effort
   | are meaningful and real
   | only when human realize the limit of their ability. [46]_

To Rendra, one should face the reality of life’s suffering \ *as it is*,
fully fronted. Without \ *waiting* and *looking* somewhere else, Rendra
appeals to his reader to participate actively in life. So active, that
one finally reached what is possible to realize: the realization of
one’s limit. However, one cannot just realize this through words or
merely understand it through the faculty. It is attained only through
action. The most important of all action is the training of the most
profound conscience. “Art is what makes human, humane,” so is the common
credo in the circle of the Indonesian traditional artists. [47]_

   | And human will not be human
   | if their conscience is not brought to life.
   | […]
   | Conscience is the just judge
   | for our self
   | Conscience is the joint
   | for a consciousness
   | of personal freedom.
   | With this poem I bear witness
   | that even when that conscience
   | is burned
   | it will not turn into dust.
   | That conscience will ever bloom
   | even when it is axed through its stem.
   | So is the nature of the human
   | as created by the Almighty God. [48]_

Rendra’s appeal is compelling because it appeals not only to the
awakening of the most profound human conscience but also because the
medium of his appeal is his \ *poetry*. One’s best way of contributing
to the universe, according to Rendra, is by knowing one’s \ *duty* and
contribute accordingly. The \ *duty* of the poet is to write poetry,
even when the poet himself felt that he was in no condition to write.

   | “My dear, Willy!” my wife addressed me.
   | She saw my cheeks were wet with my tears.
   | I rose about to say something.
   | “Ssh, hush!” whispered my wife,
   | “Don’t cry. Write a poem.
   | Don’t speak.” [49]_

Training for Clarity
====================

As symbolized in the episode of \ *Bhagavad Gita*, selfless action is
the path of self-completion. Its training involves the ability to act.
However, the teaching of the \ *Gita* puts restrain on the type of
action that counts. We might ask, what kind of action then that artists
and the audience should be involved with, so that \ *it counts*?

Rendra started with sharp criticism to fellow artists and academician in
the poem \ *A Cigar’s Poem*:

   | I have asked
   | but my questions
   | collided against the foreheads of salon poets
   | who make poetry about wine and the moon,
   | while injustice took place beside them
   | and eight million children without education
   | stunned by the feet of the Goddess of Art [50]_

The \ *salon poets* are portrayed as ignorant artists because their
subject of work does not have any relation to the \ *injustice* and
educational problem that existent in their society. Thukul said that
those are the attitude of the Indonesian artist (supposedly in his
time). [51]_ Art should live where the artist lives, recording what
takes place in its surrounding. [52]_

The Goddess of Art is worthy of our attention in this poetry. While she
is a goddess with supposedly has power over humans, she is helpless in
the face of “eight million children without education.” Is Rendra tried
to show that the goddess is, after all, limited to a certain degree?
That art, without the proper context, would render helpless when it
faces reality?

Horace, in his \ *Ars Poetica*, advised that a poet should balance two
polarities in a poem: the need to delight and instruct. [53]_ To delight
means to fulfill the aesthetic quality of a work, which an artist would
aim in the first place. However, to instruct requires something else: a
consideration of \ *ethical* *value*. Horace said a poet would like to
say something which is both delightful and beneficial for life. [54]_ Is
there merit to attain such a goal? At least during the time of Horace,
the balance of delight and instruction provides the poet with a broader
public appreciation. [55]_ This seems in line with what Camus said about
art that is able to speak to many.

Moreover, Horace gave another recommendation on how to achieve the
mentioned purpose at best. Regarding giving instruction, he recommended
that the instruction should be brief because then it is easier to be
understood: “everything superfluous flows out of a full mind.” [56]_ The
usage of superfluous language does not promote understanding. We could
find resonance in Wiji Thukul’s experience with his colleagues: fellow
paint workers. He found that when he took his colleagues to a play, they
could not follow it because of its \ *difficulty*. He became unable to
discuss it with them. Therefore, he shaped his language so that it is
understandable by most people. [57]_

Given that *ars* means “craft,” it demands training. To express
oneself, so that others understand, requires training. Often, the
complexity of expression is also caused by training, albeit the
incorrect ones.

Regarding this simplicity of expression, it is interesting to take a
detour into the commentary of academic writing by Popper in his
essay \ *Wider die großen Worte*, where, according to him, students are
trained in the wrong mindset and follow the wrong examples. [58]_

In academic writing (and other written \ *intellectual* output), Popper
criticizes the usage of difficult language over the simple one. He
proposes that not to use complicated words if their usage does not
contribute to understanding the content of the writing. Popper starts
with the ground reasoning of using simple words instead of the big ones:
because every intellectual has a responsibility to the society.

To Popper, intellectuals have a privilege over most people in society:
they had the opportunity to study. Because they studied, they have a
responsibility to society to report their research and their result of
study to the public. When they speak, however, they must be understood,
presenting themselves in the clearest way possible, and—above all—in
humbleness. That is why Popper condemned intellectuals who used big
words just to amaze. In his essay in \ *die Zeit*, he even went to
“translate” citations from Habermas and Adorno into more accessible
language.

For Popper, those who cannot say something clearly should either be
silent or continue to work until clarity in saying can be achieved. If
there is one ethical guideline that one can follow, it is given by
Popper in one interview. During the closing of a congress of philosophy
in Wien (1968), Popper needed to answer, in \ *one sentence,* the
question, “What is the most urgent thing to do?” Popper was the only one
answering briefly among other philosophers. He answered, “To have some
more intellectual humbleness.” [59]_

Mills, in his advice for students, warned of the same thing. He, like
Popper, appeal for intellectual humbleness. What he afraid of was the
fact that the source of superfluous language of \ *academic prose *\ is
what he called \ *an academic pose*, hence his appeal: “To overcome
academic prose, you have to overcome academic pose.” [60]_ His advice
for students, interestingly, entitled \ *On Intellectual Craftsmanship*.
Again, an echo of the word \ *ars*: a craft that requires training. The
most beneficial training demands humbleness from the trainees: they must
admit the limit of their ability.

Let us return to the second aspect of poetry, as Horace explained. When
to delight is the goal, Horace continued, a work of fiction should be
close to reality so that the work should not ask for belief in whatever
topic it chooses. [61]_ Here, we find again what Thukul and Camus
appealed, that art should not be cut apart from the reality of its
society.

One may ask then, “But is it not fantasy a part of it? That art can and
should provide what reality cannot?” The author’s answer would be: yes,
indeed. Art can refute reality or depart from it.

The reality that Camus talked about is not \ *realism*. To Camus, if the
goal is to capture life in its entirety, it would require an invisible
camera that captures life everywhere in every moment. What the camera
captured should project itself to a grand universal screen. Hence, only
God is the true artist who is capable of such a feat, while other
artists cannot be sufficiently faithful to reality. [62]_ The most
significant work is always a combined force that creates an equilibrium
between reality and its refusal. [63]_

Since poetry is also considered a craft, Horace emphasized the
importance of training to accompany talent:

   | Whether a praiseworthy poem is due to nature
   | Or art is the question: I’ve never seen the benefit
   | Of study lacking a wealth of talent, or of untrained
   | Ability: each needs the other’s friendly assistance. [64]_

Therefore, one reaches self-completion through action: the process of
self-training. The training process means a deliberate step outside of
one’s comfort. In Horace’s word, whoever strives for a goal must be
ready to suffer, sweat, freeze, and abstain from “wine and
woman”. [65]_ Those who have chosen greatness must then come to it with
the best of effort, leaving most things and postpones others, so
Epictetus. [66]_ Concentration supports the path to self-completion, as
well as the sorting of priority.

Didactic Poem: the Javanese Tembang
===================================

Some of the well-known Javanese tembang [67]_ are didactic poems. The
poem is giving life guidance. It can be recited as a solo performance,
for one’s solitary enjoyment, or accompanied by a gamelan ensemble. As a
teaching material (piwulang), however, the song-poems are commonly be
sung from parents to their children as a lullaby. [68]_ One of the most
popular tembang with the teaching of spirituality and ethic is the Serat
Wedhatama, supposedly composed by the king Mangkunegara IV of Surakarta
and published in 1927. [69]_

The path to self-completion, according to the teaching of Wedhatama,
starts with self-isolation. Like the simile used in Horace and
Epictetus, one should leave some of the comforts of life in order to
achieve a higher goal. It is the first step necessary on the path of
self-completion.

   | When one is on a journey, away from home
   | on a trip to places of silence
   | breath the divinity of knowledge
   | so that the true destination becomes clear
   | may the heart be steadfast
   | to make use the deepest of conscience
   | contemplating on the purest compassion
   | by the edge of the ocean
   | through focused meditation, achieving enlightenment [70]_

The element of silence is essential, for this signifies the elimination
of distraction. In Javanese philosophy, eliminating distraction by
self-isolation also has the goal of isolating oneself from sensual
passion. In the *Fire Sermon* Sutra, Buddha compares the sensual
passion and desires to the fire, which burns it. [71]_ The burning of
sensual passion and evil intentions causes human suffering, and this
fire can be put off through understanding: to train equanimity to it, to
let passion cease, and finally attaining liberation from it. To go “on a
trip to places of silence” is one way to practice the equanimity and the
cease of sensual passion.

The teaching of Wedhatama centers on attaining the character of the
paragon human (janma utama). [72]_ The paragon human contributes to
society on the one hand, while perfecting their self on the other hand.
Different to a stereotypical hermit who lives entirely outside of the
society, the \ *janma utama* still perform their “knightly” duty to the
society.

   | So are the paragon ones
   | ones who sink themselves in solitude
   | ones who sharpen and cleanse their conscience
   | ones who fulfill their duties as knights
   | upholding moral orders
   | artful in consoling the society
   | so it is a religious life [73]_

What is the goal of such a practice? Why sets of rigid rules and almost
unattainable of human character? In Wedhatama, it is to obtain the
divine, true knowledge. In Wedthatama, Mangkunegara IV said of
the *nature* of this knowledge:

   | So is the true knowledge
   | It is truly consoling the heart [74]_

The goal is to obtain the knowledge that *consoles* the heart. One
walks the path to overcome human suffering. 

The artist, as humans, creates their work, be it as a revelation borne
out of talents or results of self-completion through training.
Nevertheless, most important of all: artists are human beings. The work
is an expression of their humanity. The perfection of the work comes
from the perfection of the human, and \ *vice versa*, through perfecting
their work, they are perfecting themselves. 

In reaching self-completion, a human is equipped by its nature: its
talent, its genius, its physical form, and abilities. And also: its
destiny. To walk on the path of one’s destiny is to put all these nature
to use consciously. Tools are only useful when they are put into work:
when they are used to overcome problems and difficulties. Afterward, one
could ask, what is then one’s nature? Can one then be fully conscious of
this nature? It is to find this inner truth that the old Emerson appeal
to: “To believe your own thought, to believe that what is true for you
in your private heart is true for all men […].” [75]_ Art gives humans a
mirror with which they can see themselves to recognize these natures.

The path of self-completion is a path of becoming. Every genuine
transformation takes time. Between the current point in which humans
find themselves and the point where they would like to become, lies an
unknown territory. The meeting points of human effort and the
predestined terrains are what we label human’s destiny. To recognize
one’s duty, to be aware of the relationship of one’s work and one’s
environment, to train oneself until the limit of what is possible: that
is part of human effort. In the face of the predestined terrains, one
makes use of its best ability: the ability to choose.

Let us close this long reflection with a recitation of the \ *Mantra
Manyura*, [76]_ so that our path to self-completion be blessed and
attained:

   | O, this servant wishes to recite \ *Mantra Manyura*
   | which form is a blur, almost invisible
   | whose sound is faint, at nights
   | so faint, carried by the winds
   | O, it sneaks into the heart
   | a mantra beautifully decorated
   | nevermore the clearness of the soul be haze
   | the soul is enlightened, at times of silence
   | O, in between being asleep and awake
   | Dearest Lord, the servant’s divine amulet
   | Only this what the servant asks:
   | bless it to become what it seeks to become

*Berlin, 4 April 2020*

Notes
=====

.. [1]
   As far as the author’s memory, the German sentence read: “Der
   Dichter, der sich selbst vollendete.” Unfortunately, he can neither
   recall the actual source nor find it.

.. [2]
   Thanissaro Bhikkhu, trans., “Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta [Setting the
   Wheel of Dhamma in Motion],” Dhammatalks.org, 1993,
   https://www.dhammatalks.org/suttas/SN/SN56_11.html. The author uses
   suffering as the equivalent for the Pali word dukkha used in the
   sutra. Thanissaro Bhikkhu used the word stress. The author’s choice
   is not an exact translation. It is what he perceived closer to the
   feeling of the word, both in its original dukkha or in Indonesian
   word duka.

.. [3]
   Jennifer Lindsay, *Klasik, Kitsch, Kontemporer: Sebuah Studi Tentang
   Seni Pertunjukan Jawa*, Ed. Indonesia (Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada
   University Press, 1991), 294.

.. [4]
   Bram Palgunadi, *Serat Kandha Karawitan Jawi: Mengenal Seni Karawitan
   Jawa* (Bandung: Penerbit ITB, 2002), 7.

.. [5]
   Ibid., 6.

.. [6]
   Palgunadi stressed this during the creation of cengkok, melodic
   elaboration, which gives flesh to the skeletal melody of the music
   (ibid., 490). The author, however, takes rasa more than just a
   “feeling,” as the literal translation of the word suggests.

.. [7]
   The author refers to the term \ \ *rasajati*, which means
   the \ \ *ultimate feeling*. However, here it means the ultimate
   knowledge after one got enlightened.

.. [8]
   The process of cultivating a piece of music is common to be called
   “garap,” which means cultivating a field. See, for example, Rahayu
   Supanggah, “Balungan,” ed. Kent Deveraux, trans. Marc Perlman,
   *Balungan* 3, no. 2 (October 1988): 2–10.

.. [9]
   Palgunadi, *Serat kandha karawitan Jawi*, 54.

.. [10]
   Ibid., 56.

.. [11]
   Albert Camus, *Create Dangerously* (S.l.: Penguin, 2018), 4.

.. [12]
   Ibid., 5.

.. [13]
   Ibid.

.. [14]
   Ibid., 9.

.. [15]
   Ibid., 13.

.. [16]
   The Javanese and Indian epic differs in some respects but follows the
   same main story. In Java, it also famous under the name Bharatayudha.
   While Mahabharata means \ \ *the great Bharata*, Bharatayudha
   means \ \ *the war of the Bharata*. The author wonders whether this
   different title is also stressing different focus of the theme. From
   here on, the author would switch freely between the two titles.

.. [17]
   Franz Magnis-Suseno, *Kita dan Wayang* (Jakarta: Lembaga Penunjang
   Pembangunan Nasional, 1982), 7.

.. [18]
   Ibid., 11.

.. [19]
   One can translate the name as the Song (Gita) of the Noble One
   (Bhagavad). The \ \ *bhagavad* is Kresna, who is a human form of the
   god Wisnu in the time of Bharatayuda.

.. [20]
   Attaining enlightenment (*yoga*, literally: union) through action
   (*karma*).

.. [21]
   Helmuth von Glasenapp, ed., *Bhagavadgita: das Lied der Gottheit*,
   trans. Robert Boxberger, Reclams Universal-Bibliothek 7874
   (Stuttgart: Reclam, 2008), VI: 1 and VI: 3. Here the roman numerals
   refer to the chapter and the Arabic numerals to the verse group
   (sloka).

.. [22]
   Ibid. XII: 11.

.. [23]
   Ibid. XIII: 29.

.. [24]
   Ibid. XVIII: 9.

.. [25]
   Ibid. XVIII: 45.

.. [26]
   Magnis-Suseno, *Kita dan Wayang*, 11.

.. [27]
   Søren Kierkegaard, *Either/or: A Fragment of Life*, trans. Alastair
   Hannay, Penguin Classics (London, England ; New York, N.Y., USA:
   Penguin Books, 1992), sec. Diapsalmata.

.. [28]
   Indonesian poet and human rights activist (\*1963). He is among the
   lost activists during Indonesia’s New Order political reformation
   turmoil of 1998. His whereabouts are unknown to this date.

.. [29]
   Wiji Thukul, *Aku Ingin Jadi Peluru: Sajak-Sajak* (Magelang:
   Indonesia Tera, 2000), 170.

.. [30]
   Ibid., 169.

.. [31]
   I translated this from the Indonesian word \ \ *sastra arus
   bawah* (lit. under current literature), which Thukul used.

.. [32]
   Thukul, *Aku ingin jadi peluru*, 171.

.. [33]
   Ibid., xiv.

.. [34]
   Ibid., 169.

.. [35]
   Ibid., 168–69.

.. [36]
   Ibid., 171.

.. [37]
   Ibid., 43. Indonesian title: Penyair. All translations from
   Indonesian, unless otherwise stated, are of the author’s.

.. [38]
   Thukul, *Aku ingin jadi peluru* Indonesian title: Apa yang Berharga
   dari Puisiku.

.. [39]
   Ibid., 168.

.. [40]
   Thukul, *Aku ingin jadi peluru*. In: Peringatan.

.. [41]
   Willibrordus Surendra Bawana Rendra (1935-2009) was an Indonesian
   poet.

.. [42]
   W. S Rendra, *Doa untuk Anak Cucu*, ed. Edi Haryono (Yogyakarta:
   Bentang, 2013), xiii.

.. [43]
   As declared explicitly in Sajak Sebatang Lisong (A Cigarrete’s Poem),
   for example, in Kris Budiman, “Membaca(-Ulang) Sebuah Puisi Pamplet
   Rendra: ‘Sajak Sebatang Lisong,’” *Poetika Jurnal Ilmu Sastra* 1, no.
   2 (2013).

.. [44]
   Indonesian: Ratu Adil. The Just King is a messianic figure in the
   Javanese world view, who supposedly comes at the end of days during
   the time of most peril. “Waiting and looking for the Just King” is
   often a consolation for the common people, especially during the time
   of oppression, e.g., Dutch colonialism, Japanese occupation, some
   period in New Order government, \ \ *et cetera*.

.. [45]
   Rendra, *Doa untuk Anak Cucu*. In: Sajak Bulan Mei 1998 di Indonesia.

.. [46]
   Ibid. In: Di Mana Kamu, De’Na?

.. [47]
   Indonesian: \ \ *seniman tradisi*. The common saying in Indonesian:
   “Seni memanusiakan manusia.” The author encounters this saying often
   from traditional art practitioner having Sundanese or Javanese
   cultural background.

.. [48]
   Rendra, *Doa untuk Anak Cucu*. In: Kesaksian Akhir Abad.

.. [49]
   Ibid. In: Maskumambang.

.. [50]
   In Budiman, “Membaca(-Ulang) Sebuah Puisi Pamplet Rendra: ‘Sajak
   Sebatang Lisong.’”

.. [51]
   Thukul, *Aku ingin jadi peluru*, 170.

.. [52]
   Ibid., 170. Thukul used literature instead of art.

.. [53]
   Horace, “Ars Poetica or Epistle to the Pisos,” trans. A. S. Kline,
   Poetry in Translation, 2005, vv. 341–342,
   https://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Latin/HoraceArsPoetica.php#anchor_Toc98156250.

.. [54]
   Ibid., v. 334.

.. [55]
   Ibid., vv. 341–342.

.. [56]
   Ibid., vv. 335–337.

.. [57]
   Thukul, *Aku ingin jadi peluru*, 171–72.

.. [58]
   Karl R. Popper, “Wider die großen Worte,” *Die Zeit*, September 24,
   1971, sec. Politik,
   https://www.zeit.de/1971/39/wider-die-grossen-worte.

.. [59]
   The original German reads: “Etwas mehr intellektuelle
   Bescheidenheit.”

.. [60]
   C Wright Mills, “On Intellectual Craftsmanship,” in *The Sociological
   Imagination* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959), 219.

.. [61]
   Horace, “Ars Poetica or Epistle to the Pisos,” vv. 338–340.

.. [62]
   Camus, *Create Dangerously*, 15.

.. [63]
   Ibid., 23.

.. [64]
   Horace, “Ars Poetica or Epistle to the Pisos,” vv. 408–411.

.. [65]
   Ibid., vv. 412–414.

.. [66]
   Epictetus, *The Discourses of Epictetus, with the Encheridion and
   Fragments*, trans. Goerge Long, Perseus Digital Library (London:
   George Bell and Sons, 1890), bk. Enchiridion,
   http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0236&redirect=true.

.. [67]
   English: song-poem.

.. [68]
   Esti Ismawati, “Religiosity in Wedhatama by KGPAA Mangkunagara IV: An
   Education Model A La Javanese Culture,” 2016, 38. The author
   retranslated the poem based on Ismawati’s version. The author,
   however, is not an expert in Javanese language.

.. [69]
   Ibid., 39.

.. [70]
   Ibid., 41.

.. [71]
   Nanamoli Thera, trans., “Adittapariyaya Sutta: The Fire Sermon,”
   Access to Insight, June 13, 2010,
   https://accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/sn/sn35/sn35.028.nymo.html.

.. [72]
   Ismawati, “Religiosity in Wedhatama by KGPAA Mangkunagara IV: An
   Education Model A La Javanese Culture,” 42. Ismawati’s translation of
   “janma utama” is “superior man”. To the author, this reminds him of
   Nietzsche’s “Übermensch” (the author’s preferred translation:
   Adimanusia). In Nietzsche’s conception, the Adimanusia is a new kind
   of humanity, who underwent “re-evaluation of all values” and went
   “beyond good and evil.”

.. [73]
   Ibid., 43.

.. [74]
   Ibid.

.. [75]
   Ralph W. Emerson, *Essays First Series*, Kindle Android Version,
   2012.

.. [76]
   The author translated the text based on the provided original and the
   Indonesian translation of it. The text comes from Pak Bram Palgunadi
   (personal communication, April 2020).
